### [Efficient semantic uncertainty quantification in language models via diversity-steered sampling](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/118777)
*Ji Won Park, Kyunghyun Cho*

Accurately estimating *semantic* aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties in large language models (LLMs) is particularly challenging in free-form question answering (QA), where obtaining stable estimates often requires many expensive generations. We introduce a **diversity-steered sampler** that discourages semantically redundant outputs during decoding, covers both autoregressive and masked diffusion paradigms, and yields substantial sample-efficiency gains. The key idea is to inject a continuous semantic-similarity penalty into the model’s proposal distribution using a natural language inference (NLI) model lightly finetuned on partial prefixes or intermediate diffusion states. We debias downstream uncertainty estimates with importance reweighting and shrink their variance with control variates. Across four QA benchmarks, our method matches or surpasses baselines while covering more semantic clusters with the same number of samples. Being modular and requiring no gradient access to the base LLM, the framework promises to serve as a drop-in enhancement for uncertainty estimation in risk-sensitive model deployments.


### [FineGRAIN: Evaluating Failure Modes of Text-to-Image Models with Vision Language Model Judges](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/121439)
*Kevin Hayes, Micah Goldblum, Vikash Sehwag, Gowthami Somepalli, Ashwinee Panda, Tom Goldstein*

Text-to-image (T2I) models are capable of generating visually impressive images, yet they often fail to accurately capture specific attributes in user prompts, such as the correct number of objects with the specified colors. The diversity of such errors underscores the need for a hierarchical evaluation framework that can compare prompt adherence abilities of different image generation models. Simultaneously, benchmarks of vision language models (VLMs) have not kept pace with the complexity of scenes that VLMs are used to annotate. In this work, we propose a structured methodology for jointly evaluating T2I models and VLMs by testing whether VLMs can identify 27 specific failure modes in the images generated by T2I models conditioned on challenging prompts. Our second contribution is a dataset of prompts and images generated by 5 T2I models (Flux, SD3-Medium, SD3-Large, SD3.5- Medium, SD3.5-Large) and the corresponding annotations from a VLM (Molmo) annotated by an LLM (Llama3) to test whether the VLM can correctly identify the failure mode in a generated image. By analyzing failure modes on a curated set of prompts, we reveal systematic errors in attribute fidelity and object representation. Our findings suggest that current metrics are insufficient to capture these nuanced errors, highlighting the importance of targeted benchmarks for advancing generative model reliability and interpretability.


### [Heterogeneous Swarms: Jointly Optimizing Model Roles and Weights for Multi-LLM Systems](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/115041)
*Shangbin Feng, Zifeng Wang, Palash Goyal, Yike Wang, Weijia Shi, Huang Xia, Hamid Palangi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yulia Tsvetkov, Chen-Yu Lee, Tomas Pfister*

We propose Heterogeneous Swarms, an algorithm to design multi-LLM systems by jointly optimizing model roles and weights. We represent multi-LLM systems as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) of LLMs with topological message passing for collaborative generation. Given a pool of LLM experts and a utility function, Heterogeneous Swarms employs two iterative steps: role-step and weight-step. For role-step, we interpret model roles as learning a DAG that specifies the flow of inputs and outputs between LLMs. Starting from a swarm of random continuous adjacency matrices, we decode them into discrete DAGs, call the LLMs in topological order, evaluate on the utility function (e.g. accuracy on a task), and optimize the adjacency matrices with particle swarm optimization based on the utility score. For weight-step, we assess the contribution of individual LLMs in the multi-LLM systems and optimize model weights with swarm intelligence. We propose JFK-score to quantify the individual contribution of each LLM in the best-found DAG of the role-step, then optimize model weights with particle swarm optimization based on the JFK-score. Experiments demonstrate that Heterogeneous Swarms outperforms 17 role- and/or weight-based baselines by 18.5% on average across 12 tasks. Further analysis reveals that Heterogeneous Swarms discovers multi-LLM systems with heterogeneous model roles and substantial collaborative gains, and benefits from the diversity of language models.


### [Learning Linear Attention in Polynomial Time](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/118142)
*Morris Yau, Ekin Akyürek, Jiayuan Mao, Josh Tenenbaum, Stefanie Jegelka, Jacob Andreas*

Previous research has explored the expressivity of Transformer models in simulating Boolean circuits or Turing machines. However, the efficient learnability of Transformers from data has remained an open question.  Our study addresses this gap by providing the first polynomial-time learnability results (specifically strong, agnostic PAC learning) for single-layer Transformers with linear attention.  We show that learning the optimal multi head linear attention can be recast as finding the optimal kernel predictor in a suitably defined RKHS.  Moving to generalization, we construct an algorithm that, given a dataset, checks in polynomial time whether the set of best fit multi head linear attention networks on this data all perform an identical computation--a powerful notion for out of distribution generalization.  We empirically validate our theoretical findings on several canonical tasks: learning random linear attention networks, key--value associations, and learning to execute finite automata. Our findings bridge a critical gap between theoretical expressivity and learnability of Transformer models.


### [Measuring what Matters: Construct Validity in Large Language Model Benchmarks](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/121477)
*Andrew M. Bean, Ryan Othniel Kearns, Angelika Romanou, Franziska Sofia Hafner, Harry Mayne, Jan Batzner, Negar Foroutan Eghlidi, Chris Schmitz, Karolina Korgul, Hunar Batra, Oishi Deb, Emma Beharry, Cornelius Emde, Thomas Foster, Anna Gausen, María Grandury, Sophia Simeng Han, Valentin Hofmann, Lujain Ibrahim, Hyunji Kim, Hannah Rose Kirk, Fangru Lin, Gabrielle Liu, Lennart Luettgau, Jabez Magomere, Jonathan Rystrøm, Anna Sotnikova, Yushi Yang, Yilun Zhao, Adel Bibi, Antoine Bosselut, Ronald Clark, Arman Cohan, Jakob Foerster, Yarin Gal, Scott Hale, Deborah Raji, Christopher Summerfield, Philip Torr, Cozmin Ududec, Luc Rocher, Adam Mahdi*

Evaluating large language models (LLMs) is crucial for both assessing their capabilities and identifying safety or robustness issues prior to deployment. Reliably measuring abstract and complex phenomena such as safety and robustness requires strong construct validity, that is, having measures that represent what matters to the phenomenon. With a team of 29 expert reviewers, we conduct a systematic review of 445 LLM benchmarks from leading conferences in natural language processing and machine learning. Across the reviewed articles, we find patterns related to the measured phenomena, tasks, and scoring metrics which undermine the validity of the resulting claims. To address these shortcomings, we provide eight key recommendations and detailed actionable guidance to researchers and practitioners in developing LLM benchmarks.


### [MJ-Bench: Is Your Multimodal Reward Model Really a Good Judge for Text-to-Image Generation?](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/121393)
*Zhaorun Chen, Zichen Wen, Yichao Du, Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Siwei Han, Jen Weng, Chaoqi Wang, Zhengwei Tong, Leria HUANG, Canyu Chen, Haoqin Tu, Qinghao Ye, Zhihong Zhu, Yuqing Zhang, Jiawei Zhou, Zhuokai Zhao, Rafael Rafailov, Chelsea Finn, Huaxiu Yao*

While text-to-image models like GPT-4o-Image and FLUX are rapidly proliferating, they often encounter challenges such as hallucination, bias, and the production of unsafe, low-quality output. To effectively address these issues, it is crucial to align these models with desired behaviors based on feedback from a multimodal judge. Despite their significance, current multimodal judges frequently undergo inadequate evaluation of their capabilities and limitations, potentially leading to misalignment and unsafe fine-tuning outcomes. To address this issue, we introduce MJ-Bench, a novel benchmark which incorporates a comprehensive preference dataset to evaluate multimodal judges in providing feedback for image generation models across six key perspectives: alignment, safety, image quality, bias, composition, and visualization. Specifically, we evaluate a large variety of multimodal judges including smaller-sized CLIP-based scoring models, open-source VLMs, and close-source VLMs on each decomposed subcategory of our preference dataset. Experiments reveal that close-source VLMs generally provide better feedback, with GPT-4o outperforming other judges in average. Compared with open-source VLMs, smaller-sized scoring models can provide better feedback regarding text-image alignment and image quality, while VLMs provide more accurate feedback regarding safety and generation bias due to their stronger reasoning capabilities. Further studies in feedback scale reveal that VLM judges can generally provide more accurate and stable feedback in natural language than numerical scales. Notably, human evaluations on end-to-end and fine-tuned models using separate feedback from these multimodal judges provide similar conclusions, further confirming the effectiveness of MJ-Bench.


### [MJ-Video: Benchmarking and Rewarding Video Generation with Fine-Grained Video Preference](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/119897)
*Haibo Tong, Zhaoyang Wang, Zhaorun Chen, Haonian Ji, Shi Qiu, Siwei Han, Kexin Geng, Zhongkai Xue, Yiyang Zhou, Peng Xia, Mingyu Ding, Rafael Rafailov, Chelsea Finn, Huaxiu Yao*

Recent advancements in video generation have significantly improved the ability to synthesize videos from text instructions. However, existing models still struggle with key challenges such as instruction misalignment, content hallucination, safety concerns, and generation bias. To address these limitations, we introduce MJ-BENCH-VIDEO, a large-scale video preference benchmark designed to evaluate video generation across five critical aspects: Alignment, Safety, Fineness, Coherence & Consistency, and Bias & Fairness. This benchmark further incorporates 28 fine-grained criteria to provide a comprehensive evaluation of video preference. Building upon this dataset, we propose MJ-VIDEO, a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)-based video reward model designed to deliver fine-grained reward. MJ-VIDEO can dynamically select relevant experts to accurately judge the preference based on the input text-video pair. This architecture enables more precise and adaptable preference judgments. Through extensive benchmarking on MJ-BENCH-VIDEO, we analyze the limitations of existing video reward models and demonstrate the superior performance of MJ-VIDEO in video preference assessment, achieving 17.58% and 15.87% improvements in overall and fine-grained preference judgments, respectively. Additionally, MJ-VIDEO is able to improve the alignment performance in video generation via preference fine-tuning.


### [Quantifying Elicitation of Latent Capabilities in Language Models](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/119197)
*Elizabeth Donoway, Hailey Joren, Arushi Somani, Henry Sleight, Julian Michael, Michael Deweese, John Schulman, Ethan Perez, Fabien Roger, Jan Leike*

Large language models often possess latent capabilities that lie dormant unless explicitly elicited, or surfaced, through fine-tuning or prompt engineering. Predicting, assessing, and understanding these latent capabilities pose significant challenges in the development of effective, safe AI systems. In this work, we recast elicitation as an information-constrained fine-tuning problem and empirically characterize an upper bound on the minimal number of parameters needed to reach a certain task accuracy. We find that training as few as 10–100 randomly chosen parameters---several orders of magnitude fewer than state-of-the-art parameter-efficient methods---can recover up to 50\% of the performance gap between pretrained-only and fully fine-tuned models, and 1,000s to 10,000s of parameters can recover 95\% of this performance gap. We show that a logistic curve fits the relationship between the number of trained parameters and the fraction of the performance gap recovered. To help explain this behavior, we consider a simplified picture of elicitation via fine-tuning where each trainable parameter serves as an encoding mechanism for accessing task-specific knowledge. We observe a relationship between the number of trained parameters and the effectiveness in eliciting latent capabilities, offering a potential route to distinguish elicitation from teaching.


### [REGen: Multimodal Retrieval-Embedded Generation for Long-to-Short Video Editing](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/119175)
*Weihan Xu, Yimeng Ma, Jingyue Huang, Yang Li, Wenye Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Julian Mcauley, Paul Pu Liang, Hao-Wen Dong*

Short videos are an effective tool for promoting contents and improving knowledge accessibility. While existing extractive video summarization methods struggle to produce a coherent narrative, existing abstractive methods cannot `quote' from the input videos, i.e., inserting short video clips in their outputs. In this work, we explore novel video editing models for generating shorts that feature a coherent narrative with embedded video insertions extracted from a long input video. We propose a novel retrieval-embedded generation framework that allows a large language model to quote multimodal resources while maintaining a coherent narrative. Our proposed REGen system first generates the output story script with quote placeholders using a finetuned large language model, and then uses a novel retrieval model to replace the quote placeholders by selecting a video clip that best supports the narrative from a pool of candidate quotable video clips. We examine the proposed method on the task of documentary teaser generation, where short interview insertions are commonly used to support the narrative of a documentary. Our objective evaluations show that the proposed method can effectively insert short video clips while maintaining a coherent narrative. In a subjective survey, we show that our proposed method outperforms existing abstractive and extractive approaches in terms of coherence, alignment, and realism in teaser generation.


### [The Leaderboard Illusion](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/121845)
*Shivalika Singh, Yiyang Nan, Alex Wang, Daniel Dsouza, Sayash Kapoor, Ahmet Üstün, Sanmi Koyejo, Yuntian Deng, Shayne Longpre, Noah Smith, Beyza Ermis, Marzieh Fadaee, Sara Hooker*

Measuring progress is fundamental to the advancement of any scientific field. As benchmarks play an increasingly central role, they also grow more susceptible to distortion.Chatbot Arena has emerged as the go-to leaderboard for ranking the most capable AI systems. Yet, in this work we identify systematic issues that have resulted in a distorted playing field. We find that undisclosed private testing practices benefit a handful of providers who are able to test multiple variants before public release and retract scores if desired. We establish that the ability of these providers to choose the best score leads to biased Arena scores due to selective disclosure of performance results. At an extreme, we found one provider testing 27 private variants before making one model public at the second position on the leaderboard. We also establish that proprietary closed models are sampled at higher rates (number of battles) and have fewer models removed from the arena than open-weight and open-source alternatives. Both these policies lead to large data access asymmetries over time. The top two providers have individually received an estimated 19.2% and 20.4% of all data on the arena. In contrast, a combined 83 open-weight models have only received an estimated 29.7% of the total data. With conservative estimates, we show that access to Chatbot Arena data yields substantial benefits; even limited additional data can result in relative performance gains of up to 112% on ArenaHard, a test set from the arena distribution.Together, these dynamics result in overfitting to Arena-specific dynamics rather than general model quality. The Arena builds on the substantial efforts of both the organizers and an open community that maintains this valuable evaluation platform. We offer actionable recommendations to reform the Chatbot Arena's evaluation framework and promote fairer, more transparent benchmarking for the field.


### [Weaver: Shrinking the Generation-Verification Gap by Scaling Compute for Verification](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/117007)
*Jon Saad-Falcon, Estefany Kelly Buchanan, Mayee Chen, Tzu-Heng Huang, Brendan McLaughlin, Tanvir Bhathal, Zhu, Ben Athiwaratkun, Frederic Sala, Scott Linderman, Azalia Mirhoseini, Christopher Ré*

Verifiers can improve language model (LM) capabilities by providing feedback or selecting the best response from a pool of generated candidates. Currently, high-quality verifiers are either unscalable (e.g., humans) or limited in utility (e.g., tools like Lean for formal proofs). While LM judges and reward models have become broadly useful as general-purpose verifiers, a significant performance gap remains between them and oracle verifiers. To help close this gap, we introduce Weaver, a framework for designing a strong verifier by combining multiple weak, imperfect verifiers. First we find that weighted ensembles of verifiers, which typically require learning from labeled data, significantly outperform unweighted combinations due to differences in the verifiers. To reduce the dependency on labeled data, Weaver leverages weak supervision to estimate each verifier’s accuracy and combines their outputs into a unified score that better reflects true response quality. However, directly applying weak supervision algorithms poses several challenges, including inconsistent verifier output formats and handling low-quality verifiers. Weaver addresses these challenges by using dataset statistics to normalize outputs and filter specific verifiers. We study the effectiveness of Weaver in repeated sampling settings, where a model generates multiple candidate responses at test time and a verifier is used to select the correct one. Our evaluations demonstrate that Weaver significantly improves the pass@1 performance across several reasoning and math tasks, achieving o3-mini level accuracy with Llama 3.3 70B Instruct (a much cheaper non-reasoning model) as the generator, and an ensemble of smaller judge and reward models as the verifiers (86.2% average). This gain mirrors the jump achieved between GPT-4o and o3-mini (69.0% vs. 86.7%), which required extensive finetuning and post-training interventions. To make Weaver more efficient, we train a compact 400M cross-encoder using Weaver's combined output scores. This distilled model retains 98.7% of Weaver's full accuracy while reducing verification compute by up to 99.97%.


### [When Models Know More Than They Can Explain: Quantifying Knowledge Transfer in Human-AI Collaboration](https://neurips.cc//virtual/2025/poster/119536)
*Quan Shi, Carlos Jimenez, Shunyu Yao, Nick Haber, Diyi Yang, Karthik Narasimhan*

As large language models (LLMs) increasingly serve as close collaborators for humans, it is crucial that they express their reasoning in ways that humans can understand and learn from. However, this capability remains relatively less understood and under-evaluated. To address this, we introduce a conceptual framework for such Human-AI knowledge transfer capabilities and conduct the first large-scale user study (N=118) explicitly designed to measure it. In our two-phase setup, humans first ideate with an LLM on problem-solving strategies, then independently implement solutions, isolating the influence of model reasoning on human understanding. Our findings reveal that while model benchmark performance correlates with collaborative outcomes, this relationship is notably inconsistent with significant outliers, highlighting that knowledge transfer is a distinct capability requiring dedicated optimization. Our analysis uncovers behavioral and strategic factors that mediate successful knowledge transfer, and we release our code, dataset, and evaluation framework to support future work on communicatively aligned models.